#summary Instructions on how to build WebDriver
#labels WebDriver

= Building WebDriver =

== Prerequisites ==

For all versions of WebDriver:

  * The Java JDK 5 or above (download it from [http://java.sun.com/javase/downloads/?intcmp=1281 Oracle's site] if it's not already on your computer)
  * The source code (you may need to CheckOut the source from source control)

In addition, the InternetExplorerDriver needs some additional components and can only be fully built on Windows

  * Visual Studio 2008, with the 32 and 64 bit cross compilers for C++ and C# installed
  * "msbuild" should both be on the PATH. This is most easily done by starting the "Visual Studio 2008 Command Prompt" from that Start menu.

The build is based on rake, a well-known Ruby build tool. Provided you have all the gems required you can use that for building the project, though this isn't the recommended way to build.

== Building ==

The build script will determine which parts of WebDriver will be built. When there are native components that must be built, the build file will attempt to construct them before falling back to prebuilt binaries. Assuming you have checked out the source to {{{$WEBDRIVER_HOME}}}, now:

{{{
cd $WEBDRIVER_HOME   # Where the top level Rakefile is kept
go  
# or, on a UNIX system: 
./go
}}}

This will not only compile the source, but will also run any tests which need to be run. If these all pass, then you have successfully built WebDriver! 

There are more detailed instructions about how the build system works in the CrazyFunBuild section.

By default, the output of the build is somewhat terse. A log of the java compilation stages is kept in "build/build_log.xml". You can also get more verbose output by adding "log=true" to the build targets. eg:

{{{./go //javatests/org/openqa/selenium/support:test:run log=true}}}

Finally, you can get even more verbose logging by modifying the Rakefile and commenting out the line that reads:

{{{verbose false}}}

The test logs are kept in the "build/test_logs" folder.

= Tips =

== Building Selenium Server ==

You'll get a long way with just: 

{{{go //java/org/openqa/selenium/remote/server:server:uber //java/org/openqa/selenium/remote:client-combined:project}}}

That'll build the standalone "selenium server" jar and the client library too. The build output will tell you where the output files are being placed.

You can replace that second target with: 


{{{//java/org/openqa/selenium/remote:client-combined:uber}}}

The "uber" implicit targets build a single "uber jar" containing all the compiled java from the project, as well as all third party dependencies. The "project" implicit target is similar, but excludes third party dependencies.

= Useful Targets =

All of these should be run using the "go" executable.

For everything:

|| *Target* || *Purpose* ||  
|| clean || Delete all built artefacts ||

For Java:

|| *Target* || *Purpose* ||  
|| test_java || Run every applicable Java test ||
|| test_htmlunit || Run all the HtmlUnitDriver tests ||
|| test_ie || Run all the InternetExplorerDriver tests ||
|| test_firefox || Run all the FirefoxDriver tests ||
|| selenium-server-standalone || Build the standalone server ||
|| //java/client/test/org/openqa/selenium:single:run || Run the SingleTestSuite ||

For Javascript:

|| *Target* || *Purpose* ||
|| //jsapi:debug:run || Run the test server (useful for working) ||
|| calcdeps || Recalculate dependencies once a goog.provide or goog.require changes ||

= Common Problems =

== Nothing Compiles ==

Make sure that you've got the JAVA_HOME environment setting properly set up. In addition, make sure that you can execute "rake" "java", "jar" and "javac" from the command line. If you're on Windows, you'll also need to be able to execute "devenv". You may need to install a JDK. If a C++ component doesn't build properly on Windows, make sure that you are actually using the VS2008 version of msbuild (this might not be the case, even if you're in a VS2008 Command Prompt)

== All Firefox Tests Fail ==

Occasionally we change the protocol of how the java code in the Firefox driver talks to the extension. The main reason why all the firefox tests fail is because the user has installed a profile called "WebDriver". This should be deleted.

The following trouble-shooting steps might be useful:

 # Check that you have the latest version of the code ({{{svn up}}})
 # Delete the WebDriver profile. The easiest way to do this is to start firefox using {{{firefox -ProfileManager}}}

Although it was necessary in the early days of webdriver development, it is now no longer necessary to install the webdriver extension manually. Indeed, doing so is more likely to be the root of hard to track down errors. It is strongly recommended that you *do not* install the firefox extension manually

== The Build Works, but It's Very Slow ==

There have been reports of problems involving slow builds. Every test that runs does a DNS lookup to determine an alternative host name. If your network is not configured correctly, then this lookup might be very slow. To rectify this, modify the {{{getAlternateHostName}}} method in {{{org.openqa.selenium.environment.webserver.Jetty7AppServer}}} and hard code it to return a string that resolves to your machine that isn't "localhost"

== I've Followed the Steps Above and All the Firefox Tests Still Fail ==

Other things to check:

 * The FirefoxDriver is only compatible with Firefox 3 and above. Check that the first available version of firefox on the PATH is version 3 or later.
 * The driver assumes that Firefox is installed in the default location for your OS. If Firefox is not in this location, then you need to set the VM property {{{webdriver.firefox.bin}}} or modify the PATH variable to include the directory with the firefox binary in it.
 * On some platforms such as Linux, Firefox is started with a shell script. There have been reports that if your installation of Firefox wraps this shell script with another one the FirefoxDriver won't work properly. Consider calling the original Firefox script.