#summary Information about the Firefox Driver
#labels WebDriver

= Firefox Driver =

See below for instructions on how to install the FirefoxDriver.

== Pros ==

 * Runs in a real browser and supports Javascript
 * Faster than the InternetExplorerDriver

== Cons ==
 
 * Slower than the HtmlUnitDriver

== Before Going Any Further ==

The FirefoxDriver contains everything it needs in the JAR file. If you're just interested in using this driver, then all you need to do is put the {{{webdriver-firefox.jar}}} or {{{webdriver-all.jar}}} on your CLASSPATH, and WebDriver will do everything else for you.

If you want to dig deeper, though, carry on reading!

== Important System Properties ==

The following system properties (read using {{{System.getProperty()}}} and set using {{{System.setProperty()}}} in Java code or the "{{{-DpropertyName=value}}}" command line flag) are used by the FirefoxDriver:

|| *Property* || *What it means* ||
|| webdriver.firefox.bin || The location of the binary used to control firefox. ||
|| webdriver.firefox.profile || The name of the profile to use when starting firefox. This defaults to webdriver creating an anonymous profile ||
|| webdriver.reap_profile || Should be "true" if temporary files and profiles should not be deleted ||
|| webdriver.firefox.useExisting || *Never use in production* Use a running instance of firefox if one is present ||
|| webdriver.development || *Never use in production* Indicates that we're in development mode. ||

Normally the Firefox binary is assumed to be in the default location for your particular operating system:

|| *OS* || *Expected Location of Firefox* ||
|| Linux || firefox (found using "which") ||
|| Mac || /Applications/Firefox.app/Contents/MacOS/firefox ||
|| Windows || %PROGRAMFILES%\Mozilla Firefox\firefox.exe ||

By default, the Firefox driver creates an anonymous profile

== Running with firebug ==

Download the firebug xpi file from mozilla and start the profile as follows:
{{{
   File file = new File("firebug-1.5.4.xpi");
   FirefoxProfile firefoxProfile = new FirefoxProfile();
   firefoxProfile.addExtension(file);
   WebDriver driver = new FirefoxDriver(firefoxProfile);
}}}
== Installing a Downloaded Binary ==

The "wedriver-all.zip" which may be downloaded from the website, contains all the dependencies (including the common library) required to run the FirefoxDriver. In order to use it:

 # Copy all the "jar" files on to your CLASSPATH.

== Installing the Quick Way From Source (with Ruby) ==

If you're doing development work, the test suites are arranged in such a way as to use the version of webdriver found in {{{firefox/src/extension}}}

This assumes that your installation of Firefox 2 or 3.x is pretty standard. On Windows, this means that it should be installed in the default location ("C:\Program Files\Mozilla Firefox") and on the Mac under "/Applications/Firefox". On Linux, it is assumed that firefox is available on the default PATH. If your firefox is installed in a custom location, then open up the {{{SingleTestSuite}}} and add a system property to tell the firefox driver where your Firefox binary is:

{{{System.setProperty("webdriver.firefox.bin", "d:\\apps\\mozilla firefox\\firefox");}}}