#summary Easy ways to get involved with the webdriver project
#labels WebDriver

= Getting Involved =

Getting involved with an Open Source project can seem like a daunting task. Sometimes we forget that. I'd like to make it easy for people to get involved with WebDriver, so here are some easy ways to get started with your contributions.

== For Developers ==

If you can write code you can get involved by picking up one of the [http://code.google.com/p/webdriver/issues/list?q=label%3AGettingInvolved "Getting Involved" issues]. These are issues that should provide an easier way to get familiar with the code and its structure. If you run into problems or want some help, then please join the [http://groups.google.com/group/webdriver Google Group] and send us an email. Once you think an issue is complete, just create a patch and associate it with the issue. If you'd like to be able to commit directly, then the process starts by helping us to resolve some of the open issues and letting us know that you're keen to accept some more responsibility (you don't need to do that on the list: feel free to send an email to Simon Stewart directly!)

If there's something that you need to make sense of the code (perhaps an ArchitecturalOverview? Maybe something to do with why code is the way it is?) just let us know, and we'll add it to the wiki.

== If You're Not a Developer ==

We'd still love for you to contribute to the project. We know that our documentation isn't as good as it should be yet, and we'd appreciate some help understanding what we've missed. We'd be happy to receive suggestions or entire sections for the wiki in any format that you find easy. If you're familiar with source control, then a patch would be best, but if you're not then contributing can be as easy as opening an issue and attaching your text to it.