#summary A guide to using the python bindings for Selenium/Webdriver.
#labels Phase-Deploy,Phase-Support,WebDriver

=Introduction=

The python bindings for Selenium 2 are now available. The bindings include the full functionality of Selenium 1 and 2 (WebDriver). The package currently supports the Remote, Firefox, Chrome and IE protocols natively.


If using selenium 1, before attempting to run a test, be sure to [http://code.google.com/p/selenium/downloads/list download the Selenium Server jar] file, and run it via 
{{{
java -jar selenium-server-standalone.jar
}}}
in your terminal/cmd prompt, before attempting to run a test. Selenium 2 however, does not require the jar file.

= Installation =

Currently, there are two versions of Selenium available for use. 

== Latest Official Release ==
The first version, is the latest official release, which is available on the Python Package Index [http://python.org/pypi]. To use this version, in your terminal type:

{{{[sudo] easy_install selenium}}} or {{{[sudo] pip install selenium}}}


== Development Version  ==

The second version, is the current code from trunk. To use this, checkout the trunk repository at http://code.google.com/p/selenium/source/checkout. 
After the download is completed, cd to the root of the downloaded directory via terminal/cmd prompt, then cd to the `py` folder. Perform the following command: 

{{{(sudo) python setup.py install}}}. 

Upon completion, the package should be installed successfully.

One advantage of using trunk as of writing, is the reorganization of the package. Previously, to initialize a browser you had to perform,

{{{
from selenium.firefox.webdriver import WebDriver

driver = WebDriver()
}}}

This has been changed, so now all that is required is:

{{{
from selenium import webdriver

driver = webdriver.Firefox()

}}}


== Testing Source ==

When developing Selenium, it is recommended you run the tests before and after making any changes to the code base. To perform these tests, run 
{{{
./go test_firefox_py
}}}
from the root of your local copy. Other browsers can be tested by changing `firefox` to the browser you wish to test, for example:
{{{
./go test_chrome_py
}}} 

= Usage =

Depending on the driver you wish to utilize, importing the module is performed by entering the following in your python shell:

Selenium 1:
{{{from selenium import selenium}}}


Selenium 2:

Using the latest official release:
{{{
from selenium.firefox.webdriver import WebDriver
}}}

{{{
from selenium.chrome.webdriver import WebDriver
}}}

{{{
from selenium.remote.webdriver import WebDriver
}}}

Using trunk:
{{{
from selenium import webdriver
}}}

== Viewing Available Functionality ==

To view all commands available to you [while inside your python shell], after importing perform:

Selenium 1:
{{{
dir(selenium)
}}}

Selenium 2:
{{{
dir(webdriver)
}}}

To view the docstrings (documentation text attached to a function or method), perform 
{{{
print 'functionname'.__doc__
}}}

where functionname is the function you wish to view more information on. For example, 

{{{
print selenium.open.__doc__
}}}

==Comparison with Java Bindings==

Here is a summary of the major differences between the python and Java bindings.

===Function Names===

Function names separate compound terms with underscores, rather than using Java's camelCase formatting. For example, in python 
{{{
get_title()
}}}
is the equivalent of 
{{{
getTitle()
}}}
in Java.

===Flatter Structures===

To reflect pythonic behavior of flat object hierarchies the python bindings e.g. 
{{{
find_element_by_xpath("//h1")
}}}
rather than 
{{{
findElement(By.xpath("//h1"));
}}}

=Browser Support=

All of the browsers supported by the Java implementation of Selenium are available in the Python bindings. For example:

===Selenium 1 - Internet Explorer===
{{{
from selenium import selenium

selenium = selenium("localhost", 4444, "*iexplore", "http://google.com/")
selenium.start()
}}}

===Selenium 1 - Firefox===
{{{
from selenium import selenium

selenium = selenium("localhost", 4444, "*firefox", "http://google.com/")
selenium.start()
}}}

===Selenium 2 - Firefox===
Latest Official Release:
{{{
from selenium.webdriver.firefox import WebDriver
driver = WebDriver()
}}}
Trunk:
{{{
from selenium import webdriver

driver = webdriver.Firefox()
}}}

===Selenium 2 - Chrome===
Latest Official Release:
{{{
from selenium.chrome.webdriver import WebDriver

driver = WebDriver()
}}}
Trunk:
{{{
from selenium import webdriver

driver = webdriver.Chrome()
}}}
===Selenium 2 - Remote===
Latest Official Release:
{{{
from selenium.remote import connect
from selenium import FIREFOX

wd = connect(FIREFOX, server="http://example.com:4444")
}}}
Trunk:
{{{
from selenium import webdriver

driver = webdriver.Remote("http://localhost:4444", browser_name, platform, version, javascript_enabled)
}}}
===Selenium 2 - IE===
Latest Official Release:
{{{
from selenium.ie.webdriver import WebDriver

driver = WebDriver
}}}
Trunk:
{{{
from selenium import webdriver

driver = webdriver.Ie()
}}}