#summary Developing the Ruby bindings
#labels Phase-Implementation

= Introduction =

This page details how to build and test the Ruby code in Selenium.

= Details =

The CrazyFunBuild runs on a bundled JRuby jar and is based on Rake. Use the 'go' Rake wrapper to run the targets. Unfortunately, rvm sets GEM_HOME and causes trouble for our jruby-complete.jar. If you use rvm, you should disable it (`rvm use system`) before using the go script.

Since this is just a wrapper for Rake, familiar commands (like `go -T` to list targets) all work.

== Building ==

After making changes, you need to build the code (this is needed since we depend on other parts of the project):

  * `./go //rb:firefox`
  * `./go //rb:chrome`
  * etc.

Build results go in the `build/rb` directory. You can play with your changes in irb from there:

  `irb -I build/rb/lib -r selenium-webdriver`

Using/requiring the ruby code from `rb/lib` directly is not recommended.

== Testing ==

Most of the Ruby targets should work on both MRI (using `rake //rb:<target>`) or the bundled JRuby jar (using `./go //rb:<target>`). One notable exception is the //rb:remote-test target, which relies on being able to compile the server jar. You can however do the build with JRuby/go, then use rake to run the tests. 

For MRI, it's a good idea to run `rake //rb:install-gems` to make sure you have the dependencies installed. 

|| `./go //rb:unit-test` || Run unit tests for WebDriver. ||
|| `./go //rb:firefox-test` || Run integration tests for Firefox - replace "firefox" with any driver. ||
|| `./go //rb:rc-client-unit-test` || Run unit tests for selenium-client (Se 1.x/RC) ||
|| `./go //rb:rc-client-integration-test` || Run integration tests for selenium-client (Se 1.x/RC) ||

== Contributing == 

  # Make your feature addition or bug fix.
  # Add tests for it. This is important so we don't break it in a future version unintentionally.
  # Create a patch: `svn diff > my-feature.patch`
  # Create a [http://code.google.com/p/selenium/issues/entry new issue], attach the patch and add the Lang-Ruby label.