#summary Using WebDriver in your project and finding the jars and required libraries
#labels WebDriver

= Using WebDriver =

== From a New Download ==

Unpack the ZIP and copy all the jar files on to your project's classpath. The FirefoxDriver and InternetExplorerDriver have more detailed instructions about installing the native parts of these drivers. The "webdriver-support" package contains useful helper classes, such as the LiftStyleApi and the PageFactory.

== With Maven ==

If you want to use the HtmlUnitDriver, add the following dependency to your pom.xml:
{{{
    <dependency>
        <groupId>org.seleniumhq.webdriver</groupId>
        <artifactId>webdriver-htmlunit</artifactId>
        <version>0.9.7089</version>
    </dependency>
}}}
If you want to use the FirefoxDriver, you need to add the following dependency to your pom.xml:
{{{
    <dependency>
        <groupId>org.seleniumhq.webdriver</groupId>
        <artifactId>webdriver-firefox</artifactId>
        <version>0.9.7089</version>
    </dependency>
}}}
If you want to use the InternetExplorerDriver, you need to add the following dependency to your pom.xml:
{{{
    <dependency>
        <groupId>org.seleniumhq.webdriver</groupId>
        <artifactId>webdriver-ie</artifactId>
        <version>0.9.7089</version>
    </dependency>
}}}
Because this artifact dependes on the jna-3.0.9.jar, which is not in the central maven repository, you also need to download this jar file from https://jna.dev.java.net/servlets/ProjectDocumentList?folderID=10145&expandFolder=10145&folderID=9501 and install it into your local maven repository via
{{{
    mvn install:install-file -DgroupId=com.sun.jna -DartifactId=jna -Dversion=3.0.9 -Dpackaging=jar -Dfile=/path/to/downloaded/jna.jar
}}}

Finally, if you like to use any of our support classes, you should add the following dependency to your pom.xml:
{{{
    <dependency>
        <groupId>org.seleniumhq.webdriver</groupId>
        <artifactId>webdriver-support</artifactId>
        <version>0.9.7089</version>
    </dependency>
}}}
That's it. 

== From a Fresh CheckOut ==

 * Follow the instructions in CheckOut in order to get the latest version of WebDriver.
 * Run {{{rake}}} without any targets (that is, just run {{{rake}}}) This will run the unit tests too, and if that's not what you want to do, just run: {{{rake common htmlunit firefox jobbie}}}
 * Figure out which drivers you will need on your project. You'll need at least *common*, but depending on your needs you may or may not want the drivers for *Firefox* (FirefoxDriver), *Internet Explorer* (InternetExplorerDriver), and/or *HtmlUnit* (HtmlUnitDriver)
 * Now, just copy the required runtime libraries and the newly built jars on to your CLASSPATH. The InternetExplorerDriver needs to have the DLLs placed on the PATH too.

Perhaps that last point needs a little more explanation...

=== Where Jars Are Located ===

If you take a look at the top level of WebDriver's trunk, you'll see a number of directories which contain the drivers you may want to use (*common* contains code needed by every driver, *firefox*, and *htmlunit* should be obvious, and *jobbie* contains the InternetExplorerDriver)

Each of these top level directories is arranged in the same way. After a build, they each contain a sub-directory containing the required jar (named {{{webdriver-$DRIVER.jar}}}) called *build*. That is, the FirefoxDriver jar is located at {{{firefox/build/webdriver-firefox.jar}}} and the common jar is located at {{{common/build/webdriver-common.jar}}} and so on. These jars only contain the driver code, and not any required supporting libraries. For example, the HtmlUnitDriver requires the HtmlUnit jars, plus any libraries that _it_ needs.

Fortunately, all the libraries required for a particular driver are located under {{{$DRIVER/lib/runtime}}} You'll need to copy those on to your CLASSPATH too.

|| *Driver* || *Location of driver jar under trunk* || *Location of required libraries* || *Notes* ||
|| common || common/build/webdriver-common.jar || none needed || Required by every driver ||
|| htmlunit || htmlunit/build/webdriver-htmlunit.jar || htmlunit/lib/runtime || none ||
|| firefox || firefox/build/webdriver-firefox.jar || firefox/lib/runtime || none ||
|| internet explorer || jobbie/build/webdriver-jobbie.jar || jobbie/lib/runtime || none ||

Once you've done that, you should be ready to start using WebDriver in your project.