#summary Instructions on how to build WebDriver

= Building WebDriver =

== Prerequisites ==

For all versions of WebDriver:

 * The Java JDK 5 or above (download it from [http://java.sun.com/javase/downloads/?intcmp=1281 Sun's site] if it's not already on your computer)
 * Ruby (on Windows, take a look at the [http://rubyforge.org/frs/?group_id=167 One Click Installer], which also includes Rake. If you're using OS X 10.5 the default versions of ruby and rake are fine)
 * [http://rake.rubyforge.org/ Rake], which is a ruby build tool
 * The source code (you may need to CheckOut the source from source control)

In addition, the InternetExplorerDriver needs some additional components and can only be fully built on Windows

 * Visual Studio 2005
 * "msbuild" should both be on the PATH. This is most easily done by starting the "Visual Studio 2005 Command Prompt" from that Start menu.

== Building ==

The build script will determine which parts of WebDriver will be built. The HtmlUnitDriver and FirefoxDriver will be built on all platforms, but the InternetExplorerDriver will only be built on Windows and the SafariDriver only on Mac OS X. Now:

{{{
cd $WEBDRIVER_HOME   # Where the top level Rakefile is kept
rake
}}}

This will not only compile the source, but will also run any tests which need to be run. If these all pass, then you have successfully built WebDriver!

= Common Problems =

== Nothing Compiles ==

Make sure that you've got the JAVA_HOME environment setting properly set up. In addition, make sure that you can execute "rake" "java", "jar" and "javac" from the command line. If you're on Windows, you'll also need to be able to execute "devenv". You may need to install a JDK.

== All Firefox Tests Fail ==

The main reason why all the FirefoxDriver tests fail is because the required profile hasn't been set up. The following trouble-shooting steps might be useful:

 # Check that you have the latest version of the code ({{{svn up}}})
 # Delete the WebDriver profile. The easiest way to do this is to start firefox using {{{firefox -ProfileManager}}}
 # Recreate the profile using the FirefoxLauncher. The easiest way to do this is {{{rake install_firefox}}}
 # Start Firefox using the new WebDriver profile ({{{firefox -P WebDriver}}})
 # Check that the extension has been installed correctly:
   * First by checking the "Tools->Add-Ons" popup
   * Looking at the content of {{{${PROFILE_DIR}/.*WebDriver/extensions/fxdriver@googlecode.com}}} This should contain the path to wherever it is that you've checked WebDriver out to and end with {{{firefox/src/extension}}}. {{{${PROFILE_DIR}}}} is the location where Firefox stores its profiles.

Alternatively, it's possible that you have an out-of-date WebDriver profile. To sort this out, try running {{{rake install_firefox}}} again, or delete the profile entirely (using {{{firefox -ProfileManager}}} which may require you to kill any open instances of Firefox before opening properly)

== I've Followed the Steps Above and All the Firefox Tests Still Fail ==

Other things to check:

 * The FirefoxDriver is only compatible with Firefox 2 and above. Check that the first available version of firefox on the PATH is version 2 or 3.
 * The driver assumes that Firefox is installed in the default location for your OS. If Firefox is not in this location, then you need to set the VM property {{{webdriver.firefox.bin}}} (when using rake, this is done by setting the "firefox=" flag on the command line, as demonstrated on the FirefoxDriver page)
 * When setting the binary to use, specify the full path to the Firefox binary. In particular, on Windows the path should end with ".exe".
 * On some platforms such as Linux, Firefox is started with a shell script. There have been reports that if your installation of Firefox wraps this shell script with another one the FirefoxDriver won't work properly. Consider calling the original Firefox script.

== The InternetExplorerDriver Doesn't Compile ==

If you are building WebDriver on Windows, the build will _always_ try and build the InternetExplorerDriver, regardless of whether or not you have the required build tools. If you only want the FirefoxDriver or HtmlUnitDriver then you can run {{{rake test_htmlunit test_firefox}}} to only build the other drivers.