#summary Using WebDriver in your project and finding the jars and required libraries

= Using WebDriver =

== From a New Download ==

Currently, the only way to introduce WebDriver to your project is to CheckOut the source code and build from that. This is far easier than it sounds :)

== From a Fresh CheckOut ==

 * Follow the instructions in CheckOut in order to get the latest version of WebDriver.
 * Run {{{rake}}} without any targets (that is, just run {{{rake}}}) This will run the unit tests too, and if that's not what you want to do, just run: {{{rake common htmlunit firefox jobbie}}}
 * Figure out which drivers you will need on your project. You'll need at least *common*, but depending on your needs you may or may not want the drivers for *Firefox* (FirefoxDriver), *Internet Explorer* (InternetExplorerDriver), and/or *HtmlUnit* (HtmlUnitDriver)
 * Now, just copy the required runtime libraries and the newly built jars on to your CLASSPATH. The InternetExplorerDriver needs to have the DLLs placed on the PATH too.

Perhaps that last point needs a little more explanation...

=== Where Jars Are Located ===

If you take a look at the top level of WebDriver's trunk, you'll see a number of directories which contain the drivers you may want to use (*common* contains code needed by every driver, *firefox* and *htmlunit* should be obvious, and *jobbie* contains the InternetExplorerDriver)

Each of these top level directories is arranged in the same way. After a build, they each contain a sub-directory containing the required jar (named {{{webdriver-$DRIVER.jar}}}) called *build*. That is, the FirefoxDriver jar is located at {{{firefox/build/webdriver-firefox.jar}}} and the common jar is located at {{{common/build/webdriver-common.jar}}} and so on. These jars only contain the driver code, and not any required supporting libraries. For example, the HtmlUnitDriver requires the HtmlUnit jars, plus any libraries that _it_ needs.

Fortunately, all the libraries required for a particular driver are located under {{{$DRIVER/lib/runtime}}} You'll need to copy those on to your CLASSPATH too.

|| *Driver* || *Location of driver jar under trunk* || *Location of required libraries* || *Notes* ||
|| common || common/build/webdriver-common.jar || none needed || Required by every driver ||
|| htmlunit || htmlunit/build/webdriver-htmlunit.jar || htmlunit/lib/runtime || none ||
|| firefox || firefox/build/webdriver-firefox.jar || none needed || none ||
|| internet explorer || jobbie/build/webdriver-jobbie.jar || jobbie/lib/runtime || Copy the DLL from jobbie/build on to your PATH ||

Once you've done that, you should be ready to start using WebDriver in your project.